.Dd March 5, 2026
.Dt RIO 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rio
.Nd Lua web framework with MVC architecture and RESTful API support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar command
.Op Ar options
.Op Ar arguments
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
framework is a high-productivity web framework for Lua.
It follows the Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern and provides advanced tools
for security, persistence, and automation via its command-line interface.
.Pp
This manual covers the CLI commands, the Active Record ORM, security features,
template engine (ETL), and the caching system.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width "initializers"
.It Cm new Ar name Op Fl -database=DB Op Fl -api
Creates a new Rio application structure.
The
.Fl -api
option disables view rendering and configures the app for JSON responses only.
Supported databases:
.Ar postgresql , mysql , sqlite3 , none .
.It Cm server Op Fl p Ar port Op Fl b Ar binding Op Fl e Ar environment Op Fl d Op Fl -pid=FILE
Starts the Rio web server.
Options:
.Bl -tag -width "-e, --environment=ENV"
.It Fl p, Fl -port= Ar PORT
Set the port (default: 8080).
.It Fl b, Fl -binding= Ar IP
Set the IP address (default: 0.0.0.0).
.It Fl e, Fl -environment= Ar ENV
Set the environment (development, test, production).
.It Fl d, Fl -daemon
Run the server in the background as a daemon.
.It Fl -pid= Ar FILE
Specify the PID file for daemon mode (default: tmp/pids/server.pid).
.El
.It Cm console Op Fl e Ar environment Op Fl s
Opens an interactive Rio console (REPL) with the application environment loaded.
All models are automatically loaded into the global scope.
Options:
.Bl -tag -width "-e, --environment=ENV"
.It Fl e, Fl -environment= Ar ENV
Set the environment (default: development).
.It Fl s, Fl -sandbox
Rollback any database changes upon exiting.
.El
.Pp
Available objects in console:
.Ar app
(application instance),
.Ar db
(database helpers),
.Ar helper
(view utilities),
.Ar reload
(reload project modules),
.Ar pp
(pretty-print),
.Ar history
(command history),
.Ar clear
(clear screen).
.It Cm runner Op Fl e Ar environment Op Fl -skip-executor Ar code|file
Executes Lua code or a file within the context of the Rio application.
The
.Fl -skip-executor
option skips loading models and connecting to the database.
.It Cm routes Op Fl c Ar controller Op Fl g Ar pattern Op Fl E
Lists all defined routes, URI patterns, and handlers.
Options:
.Bl -tag -width "-c, --controller=NAME"
.It Fl c, Fl -controller= Ar NAME
Filter routes by controller name.
.It Fl g, Fl -grep= Ar PATTERN
Filter routes by matching pattern in verb, URI, or controller.
.It Fl E, Fl -expanded
Display detailed information in expanded format.
.El
.It Cm test Op Ar args
Executes the application's test suite using Busted.
Additional arguments are passed directly to Busted.
.It Cm about
Displays system information, versions, and database status.
.It Cm stats
Shows project statistics (LOC, methods, Modules, and code-to-test ratio).
.It Cm initializers
Lists the order in which the application's initialization scripts are loaded.
.It Cm scaffold Ar Name Op Ar fields
Alias for
.Cm generate scaffold .
.It Cm resource Ar Name Op Ar fields
Alias for
.Cm generate resource .
.It Cm help Op Ar command Op Ar subcommand
Displays help for a command or a specific subcommand.
.El
.Sh GENERATORS AND DESTRUCTORS
Generators create boilerplate code, while destructors remove it.
.Bl -tag -width "generate scaffold"
.It Cm generate scaffold Ar Name Op Ar fields
Creates a full CRUD (Model, Migration, Controller, Views, Tests, and Routes).
.It Cm generate resource Ar Name Op Ar fields
Creates a scaffold without the Views.
.It Cm generate | destroy model Ar Name Op Ar fields
Creates or removes a Model and its corresponding Migration.
.It Cm generate | destroy migration Ar Name Op Ar fields
Creates or removes a database migration file.
.It Cm generate | destroy controller Ar Name Op Ar actions
Creates or removes a Controller and its corresponding Tests.
.It Cm generate channel Ar Name
Creates a WebSocket channel and adds its route.
.El
.Pp
Fields are defined as
.Ar name:type{options} .
Available types:
.Ar string , text , integer , decimal , float , boolean , date , datetime , references .
.Sh DATABASE COMMANDS
Commands prefixed with
.Cm db:
manage the database schema and lifecycle.
.Bl -tag -width "db:seed:replant"
.It Cm db:create , db:drop
Creates or removes the physical database.
.It Cm db:migrate , db:rollback
Applies or reverts schema migrations.
.It Cm db:status , db:version
Checks the status of migrations and the current schema version.
.It Cm db:setup , db:reset
Performs a full setup or reset (Create, Migrate, Seed).
.It Cm db:prepare
Ensures the database exists and is fully migrated.
.It Cm db:seed , db:seed:replant
Populates initial data (replant clears tables first).
.It Cm db:cache:clear
Clears database metadata and logical caches.
.It Cm db:system:change Fl -to= Ar adapter
Changes the database adapter in config/database.lua.
.El
.Sh MAINTENANCE AND MAILBOX
.Bl -tag -width "mailbox:ingress:provider"
.It Cm tmp:create
Creates temporary directories for cache, sockets, and pids.
.It Cm tmp:clear
Clears all cache, sockets, and screenshot files.
.It Cm tmp:cache:clear , tmp:sockets:clear , tmp:screenshots:clear , tmp:pids:clear
Clears specific temporary directories.
.It Cm middleware
Lists active and available middlewares.
.It Cm middleware:create Ar name
Generates a new custom middleware file in app/middleware/.
.It Cm middleware:use Ar name
Enables a middleware in config/middlewares.lua.
.It Cm middleware:unuse Ar name
Disables a middleware in config/middlewares.lua.
.It Cm middleware:rm Ar name
Deletes a local middleware file and disables it.
.It Cm mailbox:install
Sets up the Mailbox system (folders, base class, and migrations).
.It Cm mailbox:ingress: Ar provider
Relay an inbound email from a provider (postfix, exim, qmail) to Rio.
.El
.Sh ACTIVE RECORD ORM
The Rio ORM manages complex relationships and database persistence.
.Ss Relationships
.Bl -tag -width "has_many :through"
.It Cm has_one
Defines a 1:1 relationship.
.It Cm has_many
Defines a 1:N relationship.
.It Cm belongs_to
Defines the owner of the relationship and foreign keys.
.It Cm has_many :through
Defines N:M relationships via a join table.
.El
.Ss Dependent Deletion
The
.Ar dependent = "destroy"
option ensures that child records are deleted when the parent is removed.
.Sh SECURITY AND AUTHENTICATION
Rio focuses on three pillars of security: Hashing, JWT, and Data Protection.
.Ss Password Hashing
Uses PBKDF2 with HMAC-SHA256 via
.Ar rio.utils.hash .
Passwords should be encrypted in the
.Ar before_save
hook of the model.
.Ss JWT Authentication
Provides token-based authentication for APIs.
Tokens are generated using
.Ar auth.generate_access_token
and verified via the
.Ar auth.jwt
middleware.
.Ss Attribute Protection
Attributes listed in
.Ar Model.hidden
are automatically removed when converting objects to JSON or arrays.
.Sh TEMPLATE ENGINE (ETL)
Embedded Template Lua (ETL) allows embedding Lua code in HTML.
Files use the
.Pa .etl
extension.
.Ss Syntax
.Bl -tag -width "<%= expr %>"
.It Cm <%= expr %>
Interpolates with HTML escaping (safe).
.It Cm <%- expr %>
Interpolates raw HTML (unsafe).
.It Cm <% code %>
Executes Lua logic (loops, conditionals).
.It Cm <%# comment %>
Server-side comments.
.El
.Sh CACHE SYSTEM
Rio provides a two-level caching system.
.Ss Query Cache (Level 1)
Stores identical SQL query results during the lifecycle of a single HTTP request.
Automatically cleared after each request.
.Ss Application Cache (Level 2)
Persistent cache shared between requests.
Stores:
.Bl -tag -width "memory"
.It Sy memory
Fast RAM storage (volatile).
.It Sy file
Stored in
.Pa tmp/cache/
(shared between processes).
.It Sy null
Disables caching.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "RIO_ENV"
.It Ev RIO_ENV
Defines the current environment (e.g., development, test, production).
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "config/routes.lua"
.It Pa config/routes.lua
Routing configuration.
.It Pa config/database.lua
Database settings.
.It Pa app/models/
Application models.
.It Pa app/controllers/
Application controllers.
.It Pa app/views/
ETL templates.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr busted 1 ,
.Xr lua 1
.Sh AUTHORS
The Rio Framework Team.
.Sh BUGS
Report bugs at the official repository.
